---
id: 347
title: moment.js
date: 2013-07-09T21:19:34+10:00
author: Martin Brennan
layout: post
guid: http://www.martin-brennan.com/?p=347
permalink: /moment-js/
iconcategory:
  - Development
dsq_thread_id:
  - 1500278690
mashsb_shares:
  - 0
mashsb_timestamp:
  - 1464920052
mashsb_jsonshares:
  - '{"total":0}'
categories:
  - Development
---
I&#8217;m back after a very long hiatus to talk to you about an excellent JavaScript date and time library that I have recently found called [momentjs](http://momentjs.com/). Messing around with dates and times in JavaScript can be a huge pain with the default functionality of the `Date` object, especially when it comes to parsing and formatting dates in various formats. I used to use the horribly-outdated-and-with-bad-docs-and-consistency [date.js](http://www.datejs.com/), after which moment.js is a breath of fresh air. Moment.js seeks to simplify that entire process by being extremely simple to use; it only has about 10 basic functions in total, which nevertheless are very useful and powerful, especially when developing applications or plugins driven by dates such as calendars.<!--more-->

In this article I will go over how some basic functionality of moment.js, as well as some features I think are really cool and useful like its formatting and parsing. First off, we are going to capture a moment by calling the following:

```javascript
var m = new moment();
```

That&#8217;s it! We can then see the formatted version of this date including timezone by calling the following:

```javascript
m.format();
/// "2013-07-09T20:48:13+10:00"
```

But oh no we won&#8217;t stop there! Let&#8217;s say I wanted to return my date in the Australian date format, which is DD/MM/YYYY. Moment.js can do that in the same line! (the case is slightly different from the normal formatting, [luckily they have a guide](http://momentjs.com/docs/#/parsing/string-format/)).

```javascript
m.format("DD/MM/YYYY");
/// "09/07/2013"
```

Alright that&#8217;s pretty cool. Let&#8217;s say though that we have an existing date that we are pulling from the database, or one that the user is inputting in a specific format. No matter, moment.js handles that too by letting you specify the format when you create a new moment.

```javascript
var m = new moment("25/09/1990","DD/MM/YYYY");
m.format();
/// "1990-09-25T00:00:00+10:00"
```

Amazing! But that&#8217;s not the coolest thing, oh no. Not by a longshot. What if by some chance your users were unpredictable and did not follow your sensible date inputting guidelines. No worries at all says moment.js, you can specify **multiple formats** for your dates, and any matching one will parse the input!

```javascript
var m = new moment("25-09-1990",["DD/MM/YYYY", "DD-MM-YYYY"]);
m.format();
/// "1990-09-25T00:00:00+10:00"
```

For you ASP.NET users out there, you&#8217;ll know that .NET returns dates via JSON in a confusing format, such as `/Date(1198908717056)/` or `/Date(1198908717056-0700)/`, that trips up most interpreters. Not moment.js though!

```javascript
var m = moment("/Date(1198908717056-0700)/");
m.format();
/// "2007-12-29T16:11:57+10:00"
```

Man this library is awesome! One last cool example just in case you are not completely sold. Remember how I said this would be useful for calendar applications? Moment.js even has a built-in function for displaying the date as it would be shown on a calendar:

```javascript
var m = new moment();
m.calendar();
/// "Today at 8:48 PM"
```

And I&#8217;ll leave it there! That&#8217;s some of the coolest and most useful features of moment.js that I&#8217;ve found so far. Their docs for the project are **huge** though, so you should have a read of them as well, there are lots of other interesting tidbits in there. They can be found [on the same website](http://momentjs.com/docs/) as the main page.

After this post I will be trying to keep this blog a little more current, thanks for keeping up your readership despite the lack of updates! I hope I can continue writing useful posts for developers out there. Thanks and happy date formatting!
