---
title: Renewal
date: 2022-02-13T12:30:00+10:00
author: Martin Brennan
layout: note
permalink: /renewal/
oc: true
category: blog
---

A few months ago I had a work colleague who introduced me to the idea of [digital gardens](https://maggieappleton.com/garden-history). Here is a brief explanation of the concept from the linked article:

> A garden is a collection of evolving ideas that aren't strictly organised by their publication date. They're inherently exploratory – notes are linked through contextual associations. They aren't refined or complete - notes are published as half-finished thoughts that will grow and evolve over time. They're less rigid, less performative, and less perfect than the personal websites we're used to seeing.

A stellar example of this kind of thing is [gwern.net](https://www.gwern.net/index), though I'm not sure if that would be described as a digital garden exactly. I was intrigued by the idea, and researching a little further I found [this tutorial](https://maximevaillancourt.com/blog/setting-up-your-own-digital-garden-with-jekyll) and [Jekyll template on GitHub](https://github.com/maximevaillancourt/digital-garden-jekyll-template) for a note-based digital garden. [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) if you are unaware is a static site generator that converts files written in [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/) into HTML, spitting out a website with no backend server. I decided that I wanted to use it for this writing website for a few different reasons.

<!--more-->

1. I wanted a looser structure, not only blog posts and a few static pages
2. I wanted a place where I could worldbuild and expand on my fictional universes and characters, to try and help me keep details consistent
3. I wanted an easier way to store book, film, and music essays that I write

What you are seeing now is the end result. I worked on it for a month or two at first before stalling and getting stuck in my head. Who would read this? Is this the right direction to go in? Shouldn't I just be writing instead? I almost abandoned the project altogether. But then around December last year I started to think about it and tinker with it more as I worked on ideas for [[The Marrow King Saga]]. I thought that it really would be nice to have a placew of my own where I can build up the world of my stories in a way that I can easily link between. So, I continued the arduous work of moving things over from my old blog, changing link formats, tweaking styles, and so on until I landed on this and relaunched the site a few weeks back.

The main areas to look at or start from are my [[Works]] page, which links to hub pages for all of my manuscripts. The other is the [[Library]] which is a catalogue of all the books I own with links to essays for some, as well as essays on films and music. Hovering over internal links will show a small preview window of the article. At the bottom of each note (such as [[hells_angels|Hell's Angels]]) you will see a graph of all notes and how they link to one another, with links to the current note in the sidebar. But, enough about the [[Arcana]] of this website -- it has been a long time since I wrote an update on my projects, starting with [[The Thaw]].

Since [last time](/evolution), it feels like there has been little actual physical forward movement for the characters in [[The Thaw]], though they have pushed forward mentally and emotionally along their long road to Colorado.

At [[Pinnacle Mountain]] the Gardeners, after some initial prudent wariness by the occupants of the fortified community, were welcomed inside with open arms. The familiar face they found there was none other than [[George Thurman]], [[sam_hayes|Sam's]] father-in-law, who established the community around a year after he was last seen by [[pat_garrison|Pat]] defending his country estate. Guided through the inner walls by [[easton_porter|Easton]], they see a thriving populace much larger and better defended than their own back on the island, with horses and other livestock, walls, and more specialized workers.

The chapter focuses on the Gardeners telling [[george_thurman|Thurman]] and the other founders of [[Pinnacle Mountain]] about their mission, and hearing the colonist's own stories. A great feast -- great for the post-Fall world -- is prepared in the caves underneath the mountain, likely more than is sensible as the crop blight has affected the colonists of Pinnacle as well. There is dancing, music, and mead, and the Islanders can feel safe and happy for a little while. [[sam_hayes|Sam]] and [[gloria_palermo|Gloria]] are able to escape ot the walls outside, and finally are able to admit their feelings for one another, and share a kiss as snow begins to fall. Meanwhile, after [[colonel_cortland_briggs|Cortland]] and [[george_thurman|George]] swap war stories, the old Colonel seeks Pinnacle Mountain's support if he returns from Colorado with the seeds and the remnants of the military.